Introduction:
Magnesium ions channels hold an essential role in human cellular physiology, regulating bone development and cardiomiocyte activity among other functions. Divalent magnesium ions are the smallest cations involved in cellular pathways and magnesium ion channel structures are less resolved than other ion channel families.
This project aims to examine magnesium ion channel phylogeny to better understand the protein evolution of ion channels.




Methods:
This project consists of two main branches. The first branch uses protein sequence data to 
look at magnesium ion channels in Homo sapiens. Protein data is superior to DNA and 
RNA data in this instance because the channels operate at the protein level. We do not 
need to think about the relative importance of coding and noncoding DNA regions. 
Moreover, amino acids convey information in fewer letters than their corresponding 
DNA codons and avoid dealing with the degeneracy of the DNA code.

I began with a series of accession numbers pertaining to protein sequences involved in 
magnesium transport -- both in humans and other organisms. I also include accession 
numbers pertaining to epithelial sodium channel family as a control and the ribosomal 
protein as an outgroup. All of the proteins channels examined have been previously 
studied in the literature and linked to magnesium transport (Payendeh et al, 2013) or 
(Hanukoglu and Hanukoglu, 2016)


Using a procedure similar to the hydroilina exercise, I used ProteinBlast to find the 
corresponding protein sequence.




A second branch of the project uses morphological data as a proof of principle to analyze 
ion channel phylogeny. Because of the precision and abundance of sequence data, it is the 
dominant method of phylogenetic analysis, especially when protein structures have not 
been fully resolved. Yet the mantra of biology that structure determines function rings 
true. A shortcoming of protein sequence data is that it only allows us to examine the 
primary structure of the ion channels--the order of amino acids.
Amino acid form secondary, tertiary and quaternary structures in which the various 
residues and subunits interact. Two different amino acids may produce near-identical 
three-dimensional structure or a single residue substitution could contort the entire 
structure.


Discussion (continued)

The two amino acid evolution models used for this 







